STM32: Add support for STM32H7 dual core (#17100)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: boards/arm/stm32h747i_disco/doc/index.rst

.. _stm32h747i_disco_board:

ST STM32H747I Discovery
#######################

Overview
********

The discovery kit enables a wide diversity of applications taking benefit
from audio, multi-sensor support, graphics, security, security, video,

> and high-speed connectivity features. Important board features include:

Author: Done

> It embeds STM32H747XI SoC: a high-performance and DSP with DP-FPU, Arm Cortex-M7 + Cortex-M4 MCU,

Author: Done

with 2MBytes of Flash memory, 1MB RAM, 480 MHz CPU, Art Accelerator, L1 cache, external memory interface,

> large set of peripherals, SMPS, MIPI-DSI.

Author: Done

- `STM32H747XI on www.st.com`_
- `STM32H747xx reference manual`_
- `STM32H747xx datasheet`_

Supported Features
==================

The current Zephyr stm32h747i_disco board configuration supports the following hardware features:

+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| Interface | Controller | Driver/Component                    |
+===========+============+=====================================+
| NVIC      | on-chip    | nested vector interrupt controller  |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| UART      | on-chip    | serial port-polling;                |
|           |            | serial port-interrupt               |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| PINMUX    | on-chip    | pinmux                              |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| GPIO      | on-chip    | gpio                                |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+

Other hardware features are not yet supported on Zephyr porting.

The default configuration per core can be found in the defconfig files:

> ``boards/arm/stm32h747i_disco/stm32h747i_disco_defconfig_m7``

Author: Done

``boards/arm/stm32h747i_disco/stm32h747i_disco_defconfig_m4``

Pin Mapping
===========

STM32H747I Discovery kit has 9 GPIO controllers. These controllers are responsible for pin muxing,
input/output, pull-up, etc.

For mode details please refer to `STM32H747I-DISCO website`_.

Default Zephyr Peripheral Mapping:
----------------------------------

- UART_1 TX/RX : PA9/PA10 (ST-Link Virtual Port Com)
- UART_8 TX/RX : PJ8/PJ9 (Arduino Serial)
- LD1 : PI12
- LD2 : PI13
- LD3 : PI14
- LD4 : PI15
- W-UP : PC13
- J-CENTER : PK2
- J-DOWN : PK3
- J-LEFT : PK4
- J-RIGHT : PK5
- J-UP : PK6

System Clock
============

The STM32H747I System Clock can be driven by an internal or external oscillator,
as well as by the main PLL clock. By default, the CPU1 (Cortex-M7) System clock
is driven by the PLL clock at 400MHz, and the CPU2 (Cortex-M4) System clock
is driven at 200MHz. PLL clock is feed by a 25MHz high speed external clock.

Serial Port
===========

The STM32H747I Discovery kit has up to 8 UARTs.
Default configuration assigns USART1 and UART8 to the CPU1. The Zephyr console

> output is assigned to UART1 which connected to the onboard ST-LINK/V. Virtual

Reviewer: Not sure what the right fix is here, but should this be ``ST-LINK/Virtual``

Author: Should be ST-LINK/V3.0. Txs

COM port interface. Default communication settings are 115200 8N1.

Resources sharing
=================

The dual core nature of STM32H747 SoC imposes to share HW resources between the
two cores. This is done in 3 ways:

- Compilation: Clock configuration is only accessible to M7 core. M4 core only
  have access to bus clock activation, deactivation
- Static pre-compilation assignment: Peripherals such as UART are assigned in device

>   tree before compilation. it is up to the user to ensure same peripheral is not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  tree before compilation. The user must ensure peripherals are not
```

Author: Done

>   assigned to both cores at the same time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  assigned to both cores at the same time.
```

Author: Done

- Run time protection: Interrupt-controller and GPIO configuration could be accessed
  by both core at run time. Accesses are protected by hardware semaphore to avoid
  potential concurrent access issues.

Programming and Debugging
*************************

Applications for the ``stm32h747i_disco`` board should be built per core target,
using either stm32h747i_disco_m7 or stm32h747i_disco_m4as targets.
See :ref:`build_an_application` for more information about applications build.

Flashing
========

Flashing operation will depend on the target to be flashed and the SoC
option bytes configuration.
It is advised to use `STM32CubeProgrammer`_ to check and update option bytes
configuration and flash ``stm32h747i_disco_m7`` and ``stm32h747i_disco_m4`` targets.

> By default:

Reviewer: I'd start a new paragraph here by adding a blank line before ``By default:``

Author: Done

.. _stm32h747i_disco_board:

ST STM32H747I Discovery
#######################

Overview
********

The discovery kit enables a wide diversity of applications taking benefit

> from audio, multi-sensor support, graphics, security, security, video,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from audio, multi-sensor support, graphics, security, video,
```

Author: done

===========

STM32H747I Discovery kit has 9 GPIO controllers. These controllers are responsible for pin muxing,
input/output, pull-up, etc.

For mode details please refer to `STM32H747I-DISCO website`_.

Default Zephyr Peripheral Mapping:
----------------------------------

- UART_1 TX/RX : PA9/PA10 (ST-Link Virtual Port Com)
- UART_8 TX/RX : PJ8/PJ9 (Arduino Serial)
- LD1 : PI12
- LD2 : PI13
- LD3 : PI14
- LD4 : PI15
- W-UP : PC13
- J-CENTER : PK2
- J-DOWN : PK3
- J-LEFT : PK4
- J-RIGHT : PK5
- J-UP : PK6

System Clock
============

The STM32H747I System Clock can be driven by an internal or external oscillator,
as well as by the main PLL clock. By default, the CPU1 (Cortex-M7) System clock
is driven by the PLL clock at 400MHz, and the CPU2 (Cortex-M4) System clock
is driven at 200MHz. PLL clock is feed by a 25MHz high speed external clock.

Serial Port
===========

The STM32H747I Discovery kit has up to 8 UARTs.
Default configuration assigns USART1 and UART8 to the CPU1. The Zephyr console
output is assigned to UART1 which connected to the onboard ST-LINK/V3.0. Virtual
COM port interface. Default communication settings are 115200 8N1.

Resources sharing
=================

> The dual core nature of STM32H747 SoC imposes to share HW resources between the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dual core nature of STM32H747 SoC requires sharing HW resources between the
```

Author: done

two cores. This is done in 3 ways:

> - Compilation: Clock configuration is only accessible to M7 core. M4 core only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Compilation**: Clock configuration is only accessible to the M7 core. The M4 core only
```

Author: Done

>   have access to bus clock activation, deactivation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  has access to bus clock activation and deactivation.
```

Author: Done

> - Static pre-compilation assignment: Peripherals such as UART are assigned in device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Static pre-compilation assignment**: Peripherals such as a UART are assigned in device
```

Author: Done

  tree before compilation. The user must ensure peripherals are not assigned to
  both cores at the same time.

> - Run time protection: Interrupt-controller and GPIO configuration could be accessed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Run time protection**: Interrupt-controller and GPIO configurations could be accessed
```

Author: Done

>   by both core at run time. Accesses are protected by hardware semaphore to avoid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  by both cores at run time. Accesses are protected by a hardware semaphore to avoid
```

Author: Done

  potential concurrent access issues.

Programming and Debugging
*************************

Applications for the ``stm32h747i_disco`` board should be built per core target,

> using either stm32h747i_disco_m7 or stm32h747i_disco_m4as targets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using either ``stm32h747i_disco_m7`` or ``stm32h747i_disco_m4`` as the target.
```

Author: Done

> See :ref:`build_an_application` for more information about applications build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See :ref:`build_an_application` for more information about application builds.
```

Author: Done

Flashing
========

Flashing operation will depend on the target to be flashed and the SoC
option bytes configuration.
It is advised to use `STM32CubeProgrammer`_ to check and update option bytes
configuration and flash ``stm32h747i_disco_m7`` and ``stm32h747i_disco_m4`` targets.

By default:

  - CPU1 (Cortex-M7) boot address is set to 0x80000000 (OB: BOOT_CM7_ADD0)
  - CPU2 (Cortex-M4) boot address is set to 0x81000000 (OB: BOOT_CM4_ADD0)

Also, default out of the box board configuration enables CM7 and CM4 boot when
board is powered (Option bytes BCM7 and BCM4 are checked).
In that configuration, Kconfig boot option ``STM32H7_BOOT_CM4_CM7`` should be selected.
Zephyr flash configuration has been set to meet these default settings.

Flashing an application to STM32H747I M7 Core
---------------------------------------------

First, connect the STM32H747I Discovery kit to your host computer using
the USB port to prepare it for flashing. Then build and flash your application.

Here is an example for the :ref:`hello_world` application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: stm32h747i_disco_m7
   :goals: build

> Use following commands to flash either m7 or m4 target:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following commands to flash either the m7 or m4 target:
```

Author: Done
